Line edits  by author for Filter Plot and Explore RStudio (#4752)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/single-cell/tutorials/scrna-case_FilterPlotandExploreRStudio/tutorial.md

{% snippet topics/single-cell/faqs/notebook_warning.md %}

# Setting your environment
First thing's first, we need to load the packages we will be using. In order to use any functions within a package, we must first call the library of that package. In your console (likely in the lower left corner of your RStudio window), run the following lines of code to do so:

```r
library(Matrix)
library(Seurat)
library(dplyr)
```

> The packages are called--now let's get our data files moved from our Galaxy history and into the RStudio enviornment so that we can create a Seurat object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The packages are called--now let's get our data files moved from our Galaxy history and into the RStudio environment so that we can create a Seurat object.
```

![UMI x mito zoomed in Y](../../images/scrna-SeuratRStudio/plot6.png "UMI counts x Percent mito-Zoomed in on Y.")

><comment-title>Interpretations</comment-title>

> >We can see a clear trend wherein cells that have around 3 percent mito counts or higher also have far fewer total counts. These cells are likely low quality, will muddy our data, and were probably stressed or ruptured prior to their encapsulation within a droplet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>We can see a clear trend wherein cells that have around 3 percent mito counts or higher also have far fewer total counts. These cells are likely of low quality, will muddy our data, and were probably stressed or ruptured prior to their encapsulation within a droplet.
```

{: .comment}

> We also have loads of genes, but not all of them vary in expression from cell to cell. For instance, housekeeping genes are defined as not changing much from cell to cell, so we could disclude these from our data to simplify our analyses.

Reviewer: > disclude

genuinely had no idea this was a real word!

Reviewer 2: exclude might be more familiar to an average reader? but likewise, til!

Reviewer 3: I also have no idea that this word exists. Did we agree on keeping it? :smile:  otherwise, ready to merge

Now we can begin to feel a bit more oriented in exploring our data. The clusters are labelled with cell types, and our object has been processed enough such that we may now begin to answer some real biological questions! Now that we know what we’re dealing with, let’s examine the effect of our variable, real science!

## Keep Digging
Are there any differences in genotype? Or, a more biological question, is there an impact of growth restriction on T-cell development in the thymus? We can begin to answer this question visually by using the "split.by" parameter in Seurat's plot functions.

```r
DimPlot(object = filtered_srt, reduction = "umap", group.by = "celltype", split.by = "Genotype")
```
![DimPlot colored by labelled celltype split by genotype](../../images/scrna-SeuratRStudio/plot14.png "DimPlot colored by assigned cell typesplit by genotype")

> We can see that there seems to be a decrease in cellcounts across the celltypes in the het mutant... INTERESTING! What next? We might look further at the transcripts present in both of those populations, and perhaps also look at the genotype marker table… So much to investigate! But before we set you off to explore to your heart’s delight, let’s also look at this a bit more technically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can see that there seems to be a decrease in cell counts across the cell types in the het mutant... INTERESTING! What next? We might look further at the transcripts present in both of those populations, and perhaps also look at the genotype marker table… So much to investigate! But before we set you off to explore to your heart’s delight, let’s also look at this a bit more technically.
```

Reviewer: Not sure if my edits here are correct

{: .tip}

Do you think we processed these samples well enough? We have seen in the previous images that these clusters are not very distinct, so we could consider stronger filtering. Let's take a look at gene expression of a gene we know should not be expressed in tCells as a sanity check:

```r
FeaturePlot(object = filtered_srt, reduction = "umap", features = "Hba-a1")
```
![FeaturePlot of Hemoglobin](../../images/scrna-SeuratRStudio/plot19.png "FeaturePlot of Hemoglobin")

Hemoglobin--a red blood cell marker that should NOT be found in T-cells--appears throughout the entire dataset in low numbers and as a likely marker of Cluster 6. This suggests that some background noise may have been introduced by the media the cells were in. We might consider in the wet lab trying to get a purer, more informative sample, with less background. Alternatively, in the dry lab, we can take advantage of techniques such as SoupX or others to remove this technical noise.

><tip-title>Removing Noise</tip-title>

> >Adjusting the filtering settings (increasing minimum counts/cell, etc.) is often the place to start in these scenarios of unexpected noise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>Adjusting the filtering settings (increasing minimum counts/cell, etc.) is often the place to start in the case of unexpected noise.
```
